security: secure-boot: versal op-tee introduction (#410)
foundriesio/docs: source/reference-manual/security/tee-on-versal-acap.rst

.. highlight:: sh

.. _ref-tee-on-versal-acap:

OP-TEE on the Versal Adaptive Compute Acceleration Platform
===========================================================

A Trusted Execution Environment (TEE) is the security architecture cornerstone for the ARM® platforms that we support at Foundries.io; this is the reason why as part of the partnership agreements between Foundries.io and AMD/Xilinx, we brought `OP-TEE support`_ to the Versal™  Adaptive Compute Acceleration Platform (ACAP) platform.

Among the many features included (TRNG, eFUSE access, GPIO controls, secure storage, etc), Versal ACAP users are able to use hardware supported cryptographic operations from the ARM Trusted Zone.

> .. _overview :

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _overview:
```
removing another stray whitespace.

In the case of Versal ACAP using the previously mentioned BIF file, the BOOT.BIN would be generated as follows:

.. code-block:: none

        $ bootgen -arch versal -image file.bif -o BOOT.BIN

Cryptographic driver
********************

The Versal ACAP cryptography driver rests on the PLM's `xilsecure`_ service.
It provides hardware assisted support for:

    1. SHA3-384
    2. RSA 2048, 4096
    3. ECC sign/verify
    4. AES-GCM

Other drivers
*************

The ``Versal ACAP eFUSE`` driver uses the PLM `xilnvm`_ service.
Access to certain eFuses require specific PLM configuration flags not selectable at run-time.

.. note::
   It is left to the user to ensure that the PLM has been configured as expected.

The ``Versal ACAP PUF`` driver uses the PLM `xilpuf`_ service.

At the time of  v88, the platform support includes three native drivers:

    1. ``Mailbox driver``
    2. ``TRNG driver``
    3. ``GPIO driver``

Hardware Unique Key
*******************

The calculation of the Hardware Unique Key —used to derive the RPMB secret— is similar to the Zynqmp platform: a digest is generated from the DNA eFUSE identifier and then GCM-AES encrypted.

>  However, the symmetric key for the AES-GCM encryption engine can be selected at build time using the configuration option ``CFG_VERSAL_HUK_KEY``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, the symmetric key for the AES-GCM encryption engine can be selected at build time using the configuration option ``CFG_VERSAL_HUK_KEY``.
```
All it took was a single space to make it render incorrectly!

.. _overview :

Overview
********

The OP-TEE support for the AMD/Xilinx Versal Adaptive Compute Acceleration Platform (`Versal ACAP`_) delegates most of its functionality to the `PLM firmware`_ executing in the MicroBlaze processor.
In the case of cryptographic operations, those operations or ciphers or keys not supported by the hardware will be routed to the `Libtomcrypt`_ software based implementation.

The services offered by PLM firmware are decided at build time: it is therefore important that the PLM firmware build configuration enables the services that OP-TEE will require.

As an example, if OP-TEE is configured to generate a hardware unique key, it will need access to the PLM Physical Unclonable Function and NVM services.

.. note::
   Communication between OP-TEE and the PLM uses the IPI mailbox controller being the IPI used selectable via ``CFG_VERSAL_MBOX_IPI_ID``.

As described in freely available documentation for the Versal ACAP `boot-flow`_, the BootROM handles loading the PLM, while the PLM will handle loading the rest of the images including OP-TEE.

> A reference BIF file supporting an OP-TEE instance capable of loading the FPGA pdi can be seen below. In this example OP-TEE should be configured with ``CFG_DT=y`` and ``CFG_DT_ADDR=0x00001000``.

Author: yes they have to be familiar with it

If enabled the platform expects the FPGA bitstream at 0x40000000; the location is configurable using ``CFG_VERSAL_FPGA_DDR_ADDR``.

.. code-block:: none

	ROM_image:
	{
		image {
                      { type=bootimage, file=vpl_gen_fixed.pdi }
	              { type=bootloader, file=plm.elf }
	              { core=psm, file=psmfw.elf }
	        }
	        image {
	              id = 0x1c000000, name=apu_subsystem
	              { type=raw, load=0x00001000, file=versal-vck190-revA-x-ebm-01-revA.dtb }
	              { type=raw, load=0x40000000, file=fpga.pdi }
	              { core=a72-0, exception_level=el-3, trustzone, file=bl31.elf }
 	              { core=a72-0, exception_level=el-2, file=u-boot.elf }
	              { core=a72-0, exception_level=el-1, trustzone, load=0x60000000, startup=0x60000000, file=tee-raw.bin }
	         }
         }

To build the boot-able image AMD/Xilinx uses the `bootgen tool`_; this tool aggregates all the different images in a single binary.

The available configuration options depend on the architecture.

> In the case of Versal ACAP using the previously mentioned BIF file, the BOOT.BIN generation would be as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the case of Versal ACAP using the previously mentioned BIF file, the BOOT.BIN would be generated as follows:
```

.. code-block:: none

        $ bootgen -arch versal -image file.bif -o BOOT.BIN

Cryptographic driver
********************

The Versal ACAP cryptography driver rests on the PLM's `xilsecure`_ service.
It provides hardware assisted support for:

    1. SHA3-384
    2. RSA 2048, 4096
    3. ECC sign/verify
    4. AES-GCM

Other drivers
*************

The ``Versal ACAP eFUSE`` driver uses the PLM `xilnvm`_ service.
Access to certain eFuses require specific PLM configuration flags not selectable at run-time.

.. note::

>    It is therefore left down to the user to make sure that the PLM has been configured as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   It is left to the user to ensure that the PLM has been configured as expected.
```

The ``Versal ACAP PUF`` driver uses the PLM `xilpuf`_ service.

> At the time of this writing, the platform support includes three native drivers:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the time of  v88, the platform support includes three native drivers:
```
May need to rephrase, but  I would recommend against  "at the time of this writing" if possible. if there is anything we can "anchor" the time with, it would be good to do so.

    1. ``Mailbox driver``
    2. ``TRNG driver``
    3. ``GPIO driver``

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Hardware Unique Key
*******************

> The calculation of the Hardware Unique Key - used to derive the RPMB secret - is similar to the Zynqmp platform: a digest is generated from the DNA eFUSE identifier and then GCM-AES encrypted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The calculation of the Hardware Unique Key —used to derive the RPMB secret— is similar to the Zynqmp platform: a digest is generated from the DNA eFUSE identifier and then GCM-AES encrypted.
```
We should try and use the em dash in this context, rather than a hyphen.

> The symmetric key for the AES-GCM encryption engine can however be selected at build time using the configuration option ``CFG_VERSAL_HUK_KEY``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 However, the symmetric key for the AES-GCM encryption engine can be selected at build time using the configuration option ``CFG_VERSAL_HUK_KEY``.
```

> Contrary to what happens in the Zynqmp platform, the PUF KEK is available also on non-secured boards (i.e: boards not booting signed images).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Contrary to the Zynqmp platform, the PUF KEK is available on non-secured boards (i.e: boards not booting signed images).
```

> This means that the driver has no mechanism for restricting the generation of the HUK to using data based on information ``only available`` to secured systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the driver has no mechanism for restricting the generation of the HUK from using data based on information ``only available`` to secured systems.
```

.. note::
   The security of the platform will depend on the process used to generate and lock the keys.

> Effectively Working with the boot firmware

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Working Effectively With the Boot Firmware
```

******************************************

> One of the features that make the `Versal AI Core Series VCK190 Evaluation Kit`_ a friendly platform to develop on is its integrated JTAG support: a single USB cable provides the different consoles as well as the JTAG port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the features that make the `Versal AI Core Series VCK190 Evaluation Kit`_ a friendly platform to develop on is its integrated JTAG support: a single USB cable provides the different consoles as well as the JTAG port.
```

> At Foundries.io and via the FoundriesFactory CI, we build and deliver a WIC image that allows Versal ACAP platforms to boot securely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At Foundries.io, via the FoundriesFactory CI, we build and deliver a WIC image that allows Versal ACAP platforms to boot securely.
```

> This way an average user could just flash the WIC image on a uSD card, plug it in the corresponding slot and boot to a secured functional system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way an a user can just flash the WIC image on a uSD card, plug it in the corresponding slot, and boot to a secured and functional system.
```

> But we also deliver all the individual components that form the different binaries as well as the pointers to the corresponding git trees and versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More so, we deliver all the individual components that form the binaries along with the pointers to the corresponding git trees and versions.
```

> Now lets imagine that Xilinx/AMD releases a new version of the PLM firmware; this firmware controls the actual cryptographic operations requested by OP-TEE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine that Xilinx/AMD releases a new version of the PLM firmware, the firmware controls the actual cryptographic operations requested by OP-TEE.
```

> Without having to rebuild the complete WIC image, the developer could just update and rebuild OP-TEE and PLM and include these new binaries in the BOOT.BIN image using the BIF file previously mentioned; then it would use the Xilinx Software Command Line Tool (xsct) to boot it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without having to rebuild the complete WIC image, a developer can update and rebuild OP-TEE and PLM, including these new binaries in the BOOT.BIN image using the BIF file previously mentioned. Then the Xilinx Software Command Line Tool (xsct) can be used to boot it:
```

.. code-block:: none

        $ xsct load_boot_bin.tcl

> Te xsct script would look like follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The xsct script would look like follows:
```

.. code-block:: none

        $ cat load_boot_bin.tcl

	connect
	after 1000
	target 1
	rst
	targets -set -nocase -filter {name =~ "*Versal*"}
	device program "/path/to/BOOT.BIN"

Execution of that command would boot to the U-boot shell.

> The beauty of it is that we didnt need to modify U-boot. And so, if the uSD card was plugged with a FoundriesFactory LmP image, the Linux kernel would continue booting to the final shell from which the developer could validate the new PLM/OP-TEE features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note we did not need to modify U-boot. This means if the uSD card with a FoundriesFactory LmP image was plugged into a device, the Linux kernel would continue booting to the final shell from which the developer could validate the new PLM/OP-TEE features.
```
is uSD a typo?

.. highlight:: sh

.. _ref-tee-on-versal-acap:

OP-TEE on the Versal Adaptive Compute Acceleration Platform
===========================================================

> A Trusted Execution Environment is the security architecture cornerstone for the ARM platforms that we have implemented at Foundries.io; this is the reason why as part of the partnership agreements between Foundries.io and AMD/Xilinx we delivered `OP-TEE support`_ to the Versal ACAP platform.

Reviewer 2: I think it's technically irrelevant to mention the partnership agreement in this document. I like better the introduction as:

"A Trusted Execution Environment is the security architecture cornerstone for the ARM platforms that we have implemented at Foundries.io; so/that's why we delivered `OP-TEE support`_ to the Versal ACAP platform."

or something like that

Among the many features included (TRNG, eFUSE access, GPIO controls, secure storage, etc), Versal ACAP users will be able to use hardware supported cryptographic operations from the ARM Trusted Zone.

.. _overview :

Overview
********

The OP-TEE support for the AMD/Xilinx Versal Adaptive Compute Acceleration Platform (`Versal ACAP`_) delegates most of its functionality to the `PLM firmware`_ executing in the MicroBlaze processor.
In the case of cryptographic operations, those operations or ciphers or keys not supported by the hardware will be routed to the `Libtomcrypt`_ software based implementation.

The services offered by PLM firmware are decided at build time: it is therefore important that the PLM firmware build configuration enables the services that OP-TEE will require.

> As an example, if OP-TEE is configured to generate a hardware unique key, it  will need access to the PLM Physical Unclonable Function and NVM services.

Reviewer 2: it looks like there are 2 spaces between it and will in "key, it will need access"
I don't think it requires change if it is the only thing needed to be changed. I'm only noting this in case you're going to edit the file for something else.

If enabled the platform expects the FPGA bitstream at 0x40000000; the location is configurable using ``CFG_VERSAL_FPGA_DDR_ADDR``.

.. code-block:: none

	ROM_image:
	{
		image {
                      { type=bootimage, file=vpl_gen_fixed.pdi }
	              { type=bootloader, file=plm.elf }
	              { core=psm, file=psmfw.elf }
	        }
	        image {
	              id = 0x1c000000, name=apu_subsystem
	              { type=raw, load=0x00001000, file=versal-vck190-revA-x-ebm-01-revA.dtb }
	              { type=raw, load=0x40000000, file=fpga.pdi }
	              { core=a72-0, exception_level=el-3, trustzone, file=bl31.elf }
 	              { core=a72-0, exception_level=el-2, file=u-boot.elf }
	              { core=a72-0, exception_level=el-1, trustzone, load=0x60000000, startup=0x60000000, file=tee-raw.bin }
	         }
         }

To build the boot-able image AMD/Xilinx uses the `bootgen tool`_; this tool aggregates all the different images in a single binary.

The available configuration options depend on the architecture.

> In the case of Versal ACAP using the previously mentioned BIF file, the boot.bin generation would be as follows:

Reviewer 2: ``boot.bin``

.. note::
   It is therefore left down to the user to make sure that the PLM has been configured as expected.

The ``Versal ACAP PUF`` driver uses the PLM `xilpuf`_ service.

At the time of this writing, the platform support includes three native drivers:

    1. ``Mailbox driver``
    2. ``TRNG driver``
    3. ``GPIO driver``

Hardware Unique Key
*******************

The calculation of the Hardware Unique Key - used to derive the RPMB secret - is similar to the Zynqmp platform: a digest is generated from the DNA eFUSE identifier and then GCM-AES encrypted.
The symmetric key for the AES-GCM encryption engine can however be selected at build time using the configuration option ``CFG_VERSAL_HUK_KEY``.

Contrary to what happens in the Zynqmp platform, the PUF KEK is available also on non-secured boards (i.e: boards not booting signed images).

This means that the driver has no mechanism for restricting the generation of the HUK to using data based on information ``only available`` to secured systems.

.. note::
   The security of the platform will depend on the process used to generate and lock the keys.

> 

Reviewer 2: 2 empty lines

Effectively Working with the boot firmware
******************************************

One of the features that make the `Versal AI Core Series VCK190 Evaluation Kit`_ a friendly platform to develop on is its integrated JTAG support: a single USB cable provides the different consoles as well as the JTAG port

At Foundries.io and via the FoundriesFactory CI, we build and deliver a WIC image that allows Versal ACAP platforms to boot securely.
This way an average user could just flash the WIC image on a uSD card, plug it in the corresponding slot and boot to a secured functional system.

But we also deliver all the individual components that form the different binaries as well as the pointers to the corresponding git trees and versions.

Now lets imagine that Xilinx/AMD releases a new version of the PLM firmware; this firmware controls the actual cryptographic operations requested by OP-TEE.

> Without having to rebuild the complete WIC image, the developer could just update and rebuild OP-TEE and PLM and include these new binaries in the BOOT.BIN image using the BIF file previously mentioned; then it would use the Xilinx Software Command Line Tool (xsct) to boot it.

Reviewer 2: I think BOOT.BIN should be formatted as code-in-text, but I'm not sure... so I'm only double checking

Reviewer 3: better indeed as it is the name of the artifact (same for xsct as that is the name for the tool).
